For our last example of dynamic programming
to this week, now we look at the problem of
the efficiently multiplying the sequence of
matrices.
So, as you probably know to multiply two matrices
A and B, we need compatible dimensions, so
if we have A and B, then we need that the
number of columns in A must match the number
of rows in B. So, we have m times n matrix
A and an n times p matrix B and the final
matrix is going to be your times m times p,
that the same number of rows as A must have
same number of columns as B. And the way you
compute that product A B, so if I want the
i j th entry in A B, then I will take the
i th row in A and I’ll somehow multiply
it with the j th column B. So, I will take
the first entry here, the first entry there,
so I will take A i 1 and B 1 j, multiply them
A i 2 B 2 j multiply them, finally A i n B
n j multiply add them all.
So, this takes order n steps, because I am
computing order n pairwise products and then
adding them all. So, therefore, I have to
compute finally m times p entries, each entry
requires a linear order n amount work. So,
the total cost of multiplying two matrices
in terms of basic arithmetic operations is
of the order of m times n times p. So, this
is the basic fact that we need for the problem.
So, now the concern is not computing the product
of two matrices but computing the product
of 3 or more. So, supposing I want to multiply
three matrices A, B and C, at a time I can
even multiply I need 2. So, either I have
to multiply it as A times B, let an intermediate
matrix A B and then multiply by C or I can
do B times C and then multiply it by A from
B itself.
So, matrix multiplication is not commutative,
we do not have this in general. So, it is
important that the order is the same, but
within that in which sequence I do this simplification
does not matter. So, it is associative, I
can bracket it by as A times B followed by
C or A times B followed by C, either way I
have to do two matrix multiplications and
what associativity means is that the answer
will not change, the final product would remain
the same.
But, what is interesting for us, now is that
the complexity of computing the answer can
change depending on which order I do it, whether
I do it as A times B followed by C or first
at B times C and then might be multiply by
A.
So, let us look at a very trivial example.
So, I have three matrices of this kind, so
A is 1 and these are matrix which looks like
this, it has 1 row and 100 columns, B is a
matrix which looks like this, it has 100 rows
and 1 column and C is again a matrix, which
looks like this. So, this is my A, this is
my B and this is my C. So, now, supposing
I do B times C first, if I do B times C what
happens is in this 100 will now blow up and
I will get a big matrix which is 100 by 100.
Because, I have 100 rows here and 100 columns
there and so the final thing is going to be
number of rows in B and number of columns
in C. So, the B times C matrix is actually
100 by 100 and how many steps it will take,
it takes m into n into p which is 100 into
1 into 100 which is 10,000 steps. Now, I have
A which is 1 by 100 and B which is 100 by
100, so I am going to produce something which
is again 100, 1 by 100 but I am going to take
1 into 100 into 100, we call m into n into
p, another ten thousand.
So, together this particular sequence requires
20,000 steps, if I did the other way on the
other hand, if I computed this product first,
then I have collapse it to a simple 1 by 1
matrix. So, the number of rows here is 1 and
the number of columns is there 1, so A B is
1 by 1 matrix and it takes only 100 steps
to compute. And now, again I have a 1 by 1
times of 100 by 1 matrices, so again it takes
only 100 steps, so this takes only 200 steps.
So, you can see that there can be a dramatic
difference in the complexity depending on
whether you, the bracketed is A B followed
by C or A followed by B C.
So, in general we’ll have a sequence of
M such matrices, it is right, so M 1, M 2
up to M n and their dimensions will be r 1
C 1, r 2 C 2 up to r n C n number of rows,
number of columns. The dimensions will be
given to us, so that they can be multiplied.
Remember that all we need, assuming the entries
of course, can be combined by sensible multiplication
addition operations, what we need to be able
to multiply two matrices, is that the dimensions
should match.
So, we are guaranteed that the column of each
matrix, the number of columns is equal to
the number of rows in the next matrix, so
that product is well defined. And our goal
is to find an optimum way to compute this
product, what is the sequence of basic operations
multiplying two matrices together there we
need to perform to get the minimum overall
cost. And this is equivalent to finding an
optimum way of bracketing. So, remember when
I did A times B times C, the choice of whether
to put the bracket like this, how to put the
bracket like this.
In general, if I give you now A times B times
C times D, then you can do many things, you
can do A B, C D and then multiply or you can
do C D, then B C D, then A B C D or you can
do A B, then A B C, then A B C D. So, there
are many different ways in which you can partially
compute pairs of product, products of pairs
and built up the whole thing. So, we want
to find the optimum way to do this.
So, let’s try and identify the inductive
structure in this part. So, our goal is to
compute this long product M 1 to M n, but
remember that at every stage we can only multiply
two matrices at a time. So, at the final stage
you would multiply two some mat, some two
such matrices. Now, we can regroup by bracketing,
but we cannot reorder. So, if we did the final
stage we would have had two groups, so you
would have done some product from the left
to the midpoint and some product from the
midpoint to the end.
So, for some k we would have computed M 1
to M k and M k plus 1 to M n. In the first
part after doing all this, we will have as
many rows as M 1 and as many columns as M
k, so it will be r 1 times C k. Second one
will be r k plus 1 to C n and we know that
C k is going to be equal to r k plus 1, so
that these two kindly multiplied together.
So, the final cost is going to be m into n
into p which is r 1 into C k into C n, so
we know how much the last step takes.
Assuming that it was broken at M k, the last
multiplication causes this much. Now, to get
the total cost of doing it with this particular
choice of k, we have to get the cost of computing
M 1 to M k and M k plus 1 to M n.
So, we have this final situation and now we
have these two sub problems, so we have this
two sub problems and the total cost is going
to be the cost of the first sub problem. However,
it much takes to compute M 1 to M k; however,
much it takes to compute M k plus 1 to M n
plus the cost of the last step which is to
multiply these two sub problems after that
produce one matrix each to multiply those
two matrices together. But, we have said that
this k could be anywhere between 1 and n,
so which k should we choose.
So, the spirit of these kind of problems that
we have been seen this inductive things is
that we do not try to make the choice. We
say we have no idea in advance which k is
good, so we just try out all possible case
and take the best one, in this case the minimum
value.
In other words, the cost for multiplying M
1 to M n in terms of total number of operations
should be the minimum value of k between 1
and n, it has to be strictly less than n,
because the second part will be n k plus 1.
So, between 1 and n or multiplying the matrices
1 to k, multiplying the matrix k plus 1 to
n and adding the cost of the last multiplication.
So, now in turn if I look at this for example,
in a break it out, it could break up at some
intermediate point M j. So, I will add some
M j plus 1 to M k, so I would get arbitrary
segments from 1 to n as my sub problems.
So, a natural thing is to define the inductive
structure on an arbitrary segment from M i
to M j where of course, i is less than j.
So, we want the minimum value for any k in
the middle, k between i and j or going for
M i to M k and then from M k plus 1 to M j
and the cost of the last multiplication which
is r 1 into C k into C j. So, as before we
will just use the index, so instead of writing
cost of M 1, cost of M 2, then whatever we
will write i j, cost of i j is the cost of
multiplying M i to M j in that whole sequence.
So, let us look at the final inductive form
of the equation that we need to compute. So,
the base case is when we are looking at a
sequence of length 1, so if you are computing
for example, M 1, M 2, M 3, M 4, then one
possibility that are break it up as M 1 times
M 2, M 3, M 4. Now, if I am doing this break
up then the cost of doing M 1 is nothing,
because if I am computing from 1 to 1, I am
doing no multiplication. So, the cost of i
i is 0 and then otherwise I use the recursive
formulation we had before.
We take the minimum value for k ranging form
i, but not rather strictly less than j of
the cost of i to k, cost k plus 1 to j and
r i times C k and C j. And of course, we will
only compute this when i is less than equal
to j, we will never be able to, we will never
want to compute it when the index j is smaller
than i. Now, it is instructed to check what
happens when I do something like cost i i
plus 1. So, what this will says that I want
to take M i M i plus 1, now my only possible
value for k, so k should be between i and
strictly less than i plus 1.
So, that means the only possible value for
k is i, so this will break up this thing as
M i to M i and M i plus 1 to M i plus 1 and
then inductively those will give me cost 0
and then I will only get the cost of multiplying
this pair which will exactly come out of this
pair. So, there is no problem with this base
case, we only need the base case when the
two indices are exactly equal.
So, now, as before we will have this matrix
to fill up, because we have this is not used,
because we require, so i is going this way.
So, we have the first index going this way
and the second index going that way, so we
basically never need to look at values where
the ending point is before the starting point,
so we only need to lookup half of the time.
And now if you are trying to compute the position
i j, then we will need cost i k, that is in
this row we will need values between for smaller
values than j and we will need values of the
form j k, k j in other in this column.
So, we will need the values below and to the
left which is spectral diagonal, so one way
of doing this is to fill up this way, so that
wherever we fill up, we have the values below
already and we also have the other values
here left. So, we will fill up this matrix
from bottom top, we can also fill it up by
diagonal, but it is very painful to program
it. So, it is better to do it either row by
row or column, so you can also start like
this way, you could also do in this way.
Since that wherever you start, you have the
values below and you get that, so you start
in the diagonal and work right or up. So,
either you start at the top left and work
down the diagonal and each diagonal, each
column we do bottom to top. Now, you start
in the bottom right and work up the diagonal
and each row you do left to right, so either
these would done.
So, here is a pseudo code for that, so we
first initialize the diagonal to be 0 and
now we do what we said before, we said we
start all the columns . So, this should actually
be in a column. So, column 1 we do not have
to do because that is the diagonal in which
we started column 2 onwards, so 2 to n. Then
for every row starting from the diagonal up
to the top row, we now need to compute this
minimum. So, we initially assume that the
value to be filtered is infinity, now infinity
could just need the product of all the dimensions
plus 1, because you know that’s not going
to, the cost is not going to exceed that.
So, you can choose a large value and what
we do is now you check for each value of k,
you find that inductive thing. You look at
r to k, k plus 1 to C and then r times C k
times C C. So, you lookup this particular
value which is the inductive thing and then
if it is smaller than the value you have seen
so far, so this is basically computing that
min over k
by setting into infinity and then looking
and updating every time. So, this is just
a direct implementation of the recursive of
the inductive thing and it is just enumerating
the subproblems in a way which respects the
dependency as we have seen before.
So, one interesting thing to notice that we
are filling up an order n square table, now
when we looked at longest common subsequence
or edit distance, we said that the complexity
of the problem time wise was exactly the complexity
of the size of the table. We had an M times
M table it takes M times M time to fill it
up, because in those two problems we were
filling up each entry looking at exactly three
neighbors.
So, we had a constant look up, now here what
happens is that when I am above the diagonal
at some distance in order to fill this entry,
I need to scan this row and this column. So,
the amount of time it takes to fill one entry
in my matrix could be linear. In the extreme
case when I am very powerful in the diagonal,
I could be spending order n time to fill that
entry. So, each intermediate value of the
matrix could require looking at n intermediate,
each value each position could require looking
at n intermediate value.
So, though this table is of size n square,
the actual complexity of filling the table
is of size n cube that is why this is an interesting
problem, because it says that you cannot directly
conclude the complexity of a dynamic programming
algorithm from the size of the table that
we are trying to update. Because it also depends
on the amount to the effort you have to take
to update each entry in the table.